README.md, before:

# datacite-mapping

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping)
[![Code Climate](https://codeclimate.com/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping.png)](https://codeclimate.com/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping)
[![Inline docs](http://inch-ci.org/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping.png)](http://inch-ci.org/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping)
[![Gem Version](https://img.shields.io/gem/v/datacite-mapping.svg)](https://github.com/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/releases)

A library for mapping [DataCite XML](http://schema.datacite.org/meta/kernel-4/) to Ruby objects,
based on [xml-mapping](http://multi-io.github.io/xml-mapping/) and
[xml-mapping_extensions](https://github.com/dmolesUC3/xml-mapping_extensions).
Full API documentation on [RubyDoc.info](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/master/frames).

Supports [Datacite 4.3](https://schema.labs.datacite.org/meta/kernel-4.3/); backward-compatible with 
[Datacite 3.1](https://schema.labs.datacite.org/meta/kernel-3/).

## Usage

The core of the Datacite::Mapping library is the `Resource` class, corresponding to the root `<resource/>` element
in a Datacite document.

### Reading

To create a `Resource` object from XML file, use `Resource.parse_xml` or `Resource.load_from_file`,
depending on the data source:

| XML source        | Method to use             |
| ----------------- | ------------------------- |
| file path         | `Resource.load_from_file` |
| `String`          | `Resource.parse_xml`      |
| `IO`              | `Resource.parse_xml`      |
| `REXML::Document` | `Resource.parse_xml`      |
| `REXML::Element`  | `Resource.parse_xml`      |

Example:

```ruby
require 'datacite/mapping'
include Datacite::Mapping

resource = Resource.load_from_file('datacite-example-full-v4.3.xml')
# => #<Datacite::Mapping::Resource:0x007f97689e87a0 …

abstract = resource.descriptions.find { |d| d.type = DescriptionType::ABSTRACT }
# => #<Datacite::Mapping::Description:0x007f976aafa330 …
abstract.value
# => "XML example of all DataCite Metadata Schema v4.3 properties."
```

Note that Datacite::Mapping uses the [TypesafeEnum](https://github.com/dmolesUC3/typesafe_enum) gem to represent controlled 
vocabularies such as [ResourceTypeGeneral](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/master/Datacite/Mapping/ResourceTypeGeneral)
and [DescriptionType](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/master/Datacite/Mapping/DescriptionType).

### Writing

In general, a `Resource` object must be provided with all required attributes on initialization.

```ruby
resource = Resource.new(
  identifier: Identifier.new(value: '10.5555/12345678'),
  creators: [
    Creator.new(
      name: 'Josiah Carberry',
      identifier: NameIdentifier.new(
        scheme: 'ORCID', 
        scheme_uri: URI('http://orcid.org/'), 
        value: '0000-0002-1825-0097'
      ),
      affiliations: [
        'Department of Psychoceramics, Brown University'
      ]
    )
  ],
  titles: [
    Title.new(value: 'Toward a Unified Theory of High-Energy Metaphysics: Silly String Theory')
  ],
  publisher: 'Journal of Psychoceramics',
  publication_year: 2008
)
#  => #<Datacite::Mapping::Resource:0x007f9768958fb0 …
```

To create XML from a `Resource` object, use `Resource.write_xml`, `Resource.save_to_file`, or
`Resource.save_to_xml`, depending on the destination:

| XML destination   | Method to use           |
| ----------------- | ----------------------- |
| XML string        | `Resource.write_xml`    |
| file path         | `Resource.save_to_file` |
| `REXML::Element`  | `Resource.save_xml`     |

Example:

```ruby
resource.write_xml
#  => "<resource xsi:schemaLocation='http://datacite.org/schema/kernel-4 …
```

#### Namespace prefix

To set a prefix for the Datacite namespace, use `Resource.namespace_prefix=`:

```ruby
resource.namespace_prefix = 'dcs'
resource.write_xml
#  => "<dcs:resource xmlns:dcs='http://datacite.org/schema/kernel-4' …
```

### Datacite 3 compatibility

In general, Datacite::Mapping is lax on read, accepting either Datacite 3 or Datacite 4 or a mix,
and (mostly for historical reasons involving bad data its authors needed to parse) allowing some 
deviations from the schema. By default, it writes Datacite 4, but can write Datacite 3 by passing
an optional argument to any of the writer methods:

```ruby
resource.write_xml(mapping: :datacite_3) # note schema URL below
# => "<resource xsi:schemaLocation='http://datacite.org/schema/kernel-3
```

When using the `:datacite_3` mapping, the Datacite 4 `<geoLocationPolygon/>` and `<fundingReference/>` 
elements, which are not supported in Datacite 3, will be dropped, with a warning. Any 
`<relatedIdentifier/>` elements of type [IGSN](http://igsn.github.io/overview/) will be converted 
to Handle identifiers with prefix 10273 (the prefix of the IGSN resolver).

## Contributing

Datacite::Mapping is released under an [MIT license](LICENSE.md). When submitting a pull request,
please make sure the Rubocop style checks pass, as well as making sure unit tests pass with 100% 
coverage; you can check these individually with `bundle exec rubocop` and `bundle exec rake:coverage`,
or run the default rake task which includes both, `bundle exec rake`.

Commit message:

add README note about backwards compatibility

README.md, after:

# datacite-mapping

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping)
[![Code Climate](https://codeclimate.com/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping.png)](https://codeclimate.com/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping)
[![Inline docs](http://inch-ci.org/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping.png)](http://inch-ci.org/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping)
[![Gem Version](https://img.shields.io/gem/v/datacite-mapping.svg)](https://github.com/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/releases)

A library for mapping [DataCite XML](http://schema.datacite.org/meta/kernel-4/) to Ruby objects,
based on [xml-mapping](http://multi-io.github.io/xml-mapping/) and
[xml-mapping_extensions](https://github.com/dmolesUC3/xml-mapping_extensions).
Full API documentation on [RubyDoc.info](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/master/frames).

Supports [Datacite 4.3](https://schema.labs.datacite.org/meta/kernel-4.3/); backward-compatible with 
[Datacite 3.1](https://schema.labs.datacite.org/meta/kernel-3/).

Note that although this gem maintains compatibility with multiple
versions of DataCite XML, changes to DataCite XML sometimes force
changes to the internal object model of the gem. So different versions
of this gem may require minor updates to how a part of the model is accessed.

## Usage

The core of the Datacite::Mapping library is the `Resource` class, corresponding to the root `<resource/>` element
in a Datacite document.

### Reading

To create a `Resource` object from XML file, use `Resource.parse_xml` or `Resource.load_from_file`,
depending on the data source:

| XML source        | Method to use             |
| ----------------- | ------------------------- |
| file path         | `Resource.load_from_file` |
| `String`          | `Resource.parse_xml`      |
| `IO`              | `Resource.parse_xml`      |
| `REXML::Document` | `Resource.parse_xml`      |
| `REXML::Element`  | `Resource.parse_xml`      |

Example:

```ruby
require 'datacite/mapping'
include Datacite::Mapping

resource = Resource.load_from_file('datacite-example-full-v4.3.xml')
# => #<Datacite::Mapping::Resource:0x007f97689e87a0 …

abstract = resource.descriptions.find { |d| d.type = DescriptionType::ABSTRACT }
# => #<Datacite::Mapping::Description:0x007f976aafa330 …
abstract.value
# => "XML example of all DataCite Metadata Schema v4.3 properties."
```

Note that Datacite::Mapping uses the [TypesafeEnum](https://github.com/dmolesUC3/typesafe_enum) gem to represent controlled 
vocabularies such as [ResourceTypeGeneral](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/master/Datacite/Mapping/ResourceTypeGeneral)
and [DescriptionType](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/CDLUC3/datacite-mapping/master/Datacite/Mapping/DescriptionType).

### Writing

In general, a `Resource` object must be provided with all required attributes on initialization.

```ruby
resource = Resource.new(
  identifier: Identifier.new(value: '10.5555/12345678'),
  creators: [
    Creator.new(
      name: 'Josiah Carberry',
      identifier: NameIdentifier.new(
        scheme: 'ORCID', 
        scheme_uri: URI('http://orcid.org/'), 
        value: '0000-0002-1825-0097'
      ),
      affiliations: [
        'Department of Psychoceramics, Brown University'
      ]
    )
  ],
  titles: [
    Title.new(value: 'Toward a Unified Theory of High-Energy Metaphysics: Silly String Theory')
  ],
  publisher: 'Journal of Psychoceramics',
  publication_year: 2008
)
#  => #<Datacite::Mapping::Resource:0x007f9768958fb0 …
```

To create XML from a `Resource` object, use `Resource.write_xml`, `Resource.save_to_file`, or
`Resource.save_to_xml`, depending on the destination:

| XML destination   | Method to use           |
| ----------------- | ----------------------- |
| XML string        | `Resource.write_xml`    |
| file path         | `Resource.save_to_file` |
| `REXML::Element`  | `Resource.save_xml`     |

Example:

```ruby
resource.write_xml
#  => "<resource xsi:schemaLocation='http://datacite.org/schema/kernel-4 …
```

#### Namespace prefix

To set a prefix for the Datacite namespace, use `Resource.namespace_prefix=`:

```ruby
resource.namespace_prefix = 'dcs'
resource.write_xml
#  => "<dcs:resource xmlns:dcs='http://datacite.org/schema/kernel-4' …
```

### Datacite 3 compatibility

In general, Datacite::Mapping is lax on read, accepting either Datacite 3 or Datacite 4 or a mix,
and (mostly for historical reasons involving bad data its authors needed to parse) allowing some 
deviations from the schema. By default, it writes Datacite 4, but can write Datacite 3 by passing
an optional argument to any of the writer methods:

```ruby
resource.write_xml(mapping: :datacite_3) # note schema URL below
# => "<resource xsi:schemaLocation='http://datacite.org/schema/kernel-3
```

When using the `:datacite_3` mapping, the Datacite 4 `<geoLocationPolygon/>` and `<fundingReference/>` 
elements, which are not supported in Datacite 3, will be dropped, with a warning. Any 
`<relatedIdentifier/>` elements of type [IGSN](http://igsn.github.io/overview/) will be converted 
to Handle identifiers with prefix 10273 (the prefix of the IGSN resolver).

## Contributing

Datacite::Mapping is released under an [MIT license](LICENSE.md). When submitting a pull request,
please make sure the Rubocop style checks pass, as well as making sure unit tests pass with 100% 
coverage; you can check these individually with `bundle exec rubocop` and `bundle exec rake:coverage`,
or run the default rake task which includes both, `bundle exec rake`.
